Blog Post #2: Building a Conversational AI with FastAPI and OpenAI’s API
Introduction
In our previous blog post, we set the foundation for building a conversational AI by integrating FastAPI with OpenAI’s API. This setup provides the backbone for a Q&A-style application where users can ask questions, and the AI responds with insightful answers based on provided context.

Now that our setup is fully functional, let’s dive into the specifics of how we built a conversational assistant that interacts seamlessly with users. In this post, we’ll cover the architecture, handling OpenAI responses, and the steps we took to customize responses.

Architecture Overview
Our conversational AI application is designed to:

Accept user questions.
Process each query by embedding it into a vector space for efficient similarity search.
Retrieve relevant context and send it to OpenAI’s API, which generates a thoughtful, conversational response.
Here’s a look at the architecture we set up:

FastAPI handles user requests and serves as the application’s backend.
Sentence Transformers convert user queries into embeddings for similarity matching.
Faiss performs fast, efficient similarity searches to find the best context for each query.
OpenAI API takes the context and generates a conversational response.
Detailed Steps for Building the Conversational AI
1. Embedding User Queries
We start by encoding the user’s query using a SentenceTransformer model. This allows us to represent each query as a dense vector, making it easy to match with stored data.

2. Retrieving Context with Faiss
Once we have an embedding of the user’s query, we use Faiss to perform a similarity search. This finds the most relevant context from our dataset, which we’ll use to help guide the AI’s response. The context provides important background information for generating accurate answers.

3. Crafting the Prompt and Calling OpenAI’s API
The context and user’s query are formatted as a prompt for OpenAI’s API, along with role-based instructions:

System role: Guides the assistant’s overall behavior (e.g., “You are a helpful assistant that answers questions conversationally”).
User role: Contains the specific query and context.
The prompt structure allows OpenAI to generate responses that are not only relevant but also conversational.

4. Handling OpenAI’s Response
The API’s response is then parsed to extract the generated answer, which is returned to the user through our FastAPI app.

Code Snippet Highlight
To handle OpenAI’s response seamlessly, we updated our code to access the response attributes directly, which resolved our issues with handling nested data. Here’s the snippet for extracting responses:

python
Copy code
generated_response = chat_completion.choices[0].message.content.strip()
This small adjustment improved the system’s reliability, ensuring clean and accurate responses.

Challenges and Solutions
Handling Complex API Responses
We initially encountered issues with parsing OpenAI’s response structure, which was more complex than expected. By logging and examining the raw response, we identified the correct way to access the data and adjusted our parsing logic accordingly.

Managing Large Contexts
Ensuring that relevant context is concise yet informative was another challenge. Fine-tuning the embedding and similarity search parameters allowed us to retrieve accurate contexts without overwhelming the model.

What’s Next?
With our basic conversational AI in place, the next step is prompt training. We’ll explore how to design effective prompts that guide the AI’s responses, improve conversation flow, and create a more intuitive user experience. By refining prompts, we’ll further enhance the assistant’s ability to respond naturally and accurately.

Stay tuned for our next post on prompt training, where we’ll delve into techniques for shaping the AI’s responses and building a truly interactive experience!
